Hey, YouTube.
Hey, Chris.
>> Hello.
How are you?
>> Doing excellent.
Good to see you.
>> Good to see you.
>> Yeah.
Very excited to be doing this show today.
Those of you watching live, please put your comments and thoughts into the live chat,
and we'll try to make them part of the show.
If you're watching later, we don't have time travel, so we can't do that, but we still
appreciate you watching.
All right.
Ready to kick this thing off?
>> I'm ready.
>> Chris, welcome back to Talk Python to Me.
>> Thank you.
Glad to be here again.
>> My name is Chris.
I'm the co-founder of Python.
to be here again.
- I'm glad to have you back.
We originally had you on to talk about the work
that you're doing at Practical Business Python
and looking at the page now,
your last article, "Pandas Group By Warning"
on the 26th, which as of recording two days ago,
looks like you're still really active
on Practical Business Python.
- I am.
It's been a while, to be honest.
I spent a lot of time working on the course
that we'll talk about in a moment.
And so some of this stuff fell by the wayside.
And I think like everybody in the COVID times
have been a weird time warp for us all.
So I haven't spent as much time on it as I would like,
but I am getting back into it.
And as you mentioned, just put a short article up there
that in some ways kind of encapsulates
a lot of what I wanna do with Practical Business Python
is I'm writing in this specific article in general
on the blog about problems that I encounter
that I think can help other people.
And this was a short article about some kind of
gotcha behavior with Group Buy
that I've been bitten by a couple times.
And this most recent time I decided, you know what?
I need to write about this and share it with people
so that hopefully they're not gonna fall
into the same traps that I had.
- I love when you write something
as kind of a note for yourself or a roadmap for yourself.
And then later you go back and you search for it.
You're like, I gotta remember how this went.
And like hit number one as your result.
You're like, okay, I guess I don't remember this,
but I'm going back to it.
And I, you know, my future self
thanks my old self for it, right?
- Yes, exactly.
And sometimes I even remember I wrote an article about it
and will refer to it.
And then a lot of times you're right.
I'll do a Google search and like, oh yeah.
I did tell that before.
- How interesting.
- Yeah, cool.
What a great resource.
People should be definitely checking this out
if you wanna do data science,
Python data science intersected with Python, of course.
You were on the show a couple of times ago,
way back on 2019 in the before times,
escaping Excel hell with Python and Pandas.
Basically, you were making the case
for using the Python data science stack
instead of Excel, right?
- Yes, absolutely.
Yeah, and you know, the blog and a lot of my experience
has been doing data analysis, data manipulation,
data science, and trying to leverage the power of Python.
And most people in a business setting,
their go-to data science tool,
or data analysis tool is Excel.
And it has its place, I'm not advocating
we get rid of Excel, but I think there are a lot of things
that we can do with Python that are much quicker,
much less error prone and much more efficient
than trying to do it in Excel.
And Excel is one of those tools
where there's such a wide range of usage.
There's some people that are experts
and can do really complex, very efficient things in Excel,
but there's a lot of people that treat Excel
like the proverbial hammer, everything's a nail.
So you try and use Excel to do everything
from data cleaning to building out your financial statements
to, I don't know, machine learning.
And it's probably not really the best tool
for all of those things.
I think Python really fills a nice niche
and I've had the good fortune of using it
for a lot of different types of activities
in my business career and wanted to talk about that
in the podcast.
- You know, one thing that occurred to me,
just thinking about the code that I've seen
for like visualizing data and so on with Python
compared to writing algorithms or web apps or something.
It seems to me that the amount of Python
that you have to know
and able to maybe import pandas,
load a CSV and then graph it,
you almost hardly need to know Python at all.
And it's more about knowing the APIs
of the various visualization frameworks
like Matplotlib or Seaborn, right?
- No, absolutely, I agree completely.
I mean, you basically need to know, like you said,
how to import and even backing up probably the most,
the biggest challenge is getting Python
set up on your system,
depending on the system you have and everything,
getting your environments all squared away.
But once that's done, you're right.
The data visualization libraries,
no matter which one you choose,
essentially are knowing how to call functions.
- Yeah, exactly.
And they all often seem to have their own little DSL domains
specific language for what they've decided they're going to do, right?
Yes, exactly. And I think that's, you know, part of the part of the challenge is
everybody thinks a different way. And sometimes like a library might make a lot
of sense to you, but other people it doesn't. And so that's a lot of where I
think some of the challenges in the visualization landscape are trying to
find that right API that makes sense for the actual business problems or
visualization problems that you have and how it fits in your brain.
- Indeed.
So if people are coming from a business perspective
and maybe Excel is where they
or their colleagues have been working,
I definitely recommend people go check out episode 200.
And then there was also 10 tips to move from Excel
to Python, a lot of common themes here.
- Yes.
- Normally at the beginning of the show,
I ask people how they got into programming in Python.
I've got you to answer that at least once, maybe twice,
but probably a third time is not required.
So just give us an update on what you've been up to.
- Sure.
So I am still working in the medical device industry.
My job doesn't require Python,
but my job does involve a lot of data analysis
and working with not necessarily large sets of data,
but sometimes data sets that are big enough
that it's a little bit painful to work in Excel.
And I just continue to find Python
as the tool that I reach for
when I need to do data analysis.
And I continue to use it to build repeatable
data analysis pipelines.
I use it to clean data, maybe take external data
that we buy from a third party
and integrate it with internal data sets.
Or as we'll talk about doing data visualization.
I think there are a lot of things that Python can do
from a data visualization perspective
that are easier than trying to use Excel
or some of the other tools that are available
in a traditional environment.
So I've continued to live and breathe Python.
And I would say, you know, every week I use it a little bit,
some weeks a lot more than others,
but continue to enjoy kind of that blend
of using Python for real world problems
and not just for software development sake.
- Do the people you work with,
since the program is not officially like your title,
Do they look at you as kind of like a wizard?
- A little bit, yeah.
Yeah, they certainly do.
And I mean, I've done,
one of the things that I've worked on
was a forecasting tool to help us forecast
our business performance,
anticipate what that's gonna look like,
which I think a lot of people did over the COVID times,
trying to forecast was extremely challenging.
And they just call it, well, what does the Python tool say?
So they don't really get what the underlying libraries are,
what's going on, but they do associate my name with Python.
And I don't know if they really understand
what it all means.
I certainly try and explain it,
but at the end of the day, they're happy with the results.
And like you said, they do kind of think
there's a little bit of a superpower,
as you frequently say, for knowing that.
- Well, when you go and look at the basic things
that a lot of the tools we're gonna talk about
the frameworks that we're going to talk about result in,
you could easily look over at something like Excel and go,
"Well, six, one, half dozen of the other,
that kind of the same."
But then the amount of customization and specialization that if you go a little bit
beyond just the give me a histogram of this data,
but you dig into it a bit,
it goes far beyond what things like Excel are able to do.
>> Yes, absolutely.
It's funny you mentioned histogram.
Like even a few years ago, there wasn't even really a histogram function in Excel.
You know, kind of one of the basic functions I use pretty much for any new data set is
the histogram and Excel didn't have one out of the box.
You could build one, but it wasn't there.
And I think that just kind of speaks to Excel is approaching visualization from a very different
perspective I think than the Python tools.
is much more of a how can I quickly create something
and guide the user through it and then give them
almost infinite options to customize the visualization.
So you can go in and tweak any individual data
point or axes or colors, which is useful for getting started.
But I don't think it scales very well.
And it also doesn't have some of the more sophisticated,
complex visualizations that you can do with
the Python libraries that are out there.
>> Like Sunburst and other amazing things.
>> Exactly.
>> Yeah, cool. All right.
Well, let's mention your course real quick because
what we're going to cover today is inspired by the course.
It's not the same thing as the course,
but you recently published a course over in
Talk Python, Python Data Visualization.
This is really nice because
the visualization landscape is so diverse and varied.
And it's hard to pick, I think, what should I choose?
How do I find something that, as you say, fits your brain?
How do you find something that's modern
that maybe is interactive or is good for publications?
And so in this course, you kind of do a survey
of many of the popular options.
You want to give the quick elevator pitch on this
and then we'll dive into the topics?
- Sure, yeah, like you said,
I think the Python visualization landscape is so rich,
there are so many options and many people are discouraged
and don't even know where to start.
And I think when you try and marry up that landscape
with the different types of problems
you can solve with visualization,
it really requires you to spend a little bit of time
with each one of the main libraries
or several of the main libraries
to think about how they're going to solve your problem.
And so the course steps through many of the common libraries,
gives you, like we were talking about,
the amount of Python that you need to know
to do visualization is fairly minimal.
So we don't spend a lot of time on Python.
It's more about the API and how to interact
with each visualization library to use it
in the way that it's intended.
And then I also think it's important
when people are thinking about visualization,
it's not just about the library.
It's also about thinking about visualization.
And as I point out in the beginning of the course,
visualization is a really broad topic.
I mean, there are computer science classes
that you can take a whole semester on.
There are many, many books that are really strong.
- Edward, "Tough Day" comes to mind, "Tough Day," yeah.
- Exactly, exactly.
And when you start thinking about visualization that way,
it changes the way you approach visualization
from the Excel approach of how do I just build a bar chart
to what is the information I have
and how am I trying to convey it to the end audience.
And so I spent a lot of time talking about that.
And then I also think that there is a data manipulation
component to this.
Once you start to understand how to structure your data
correctly using, maybe not correctly,
but most efficiently for data visualization.
Once you start structuring your data in that tidy format,
then it's very easy to iterate on your visualizations
and zero in on what's gonna work best for you
and your end users.
So that's what the course talks through.
It talks to the concepts,
real world examples of developing visualizations
using many of the libraries we'll talk about,
and then how to customize those visualizations
from very basics all the way up to building
custom dashboards that can be highly interactive
and potentially deployed for others to use.
- Cool.
Yeah, I definitely learned a ton going through your course.
It's over at talkpython.fm/dataviz.
People can check that out.
Let's get maybe a high level landscape.
So view of the landscape before we dive into these topics,
because there's different branches of this,
I guess you would say.
So there's a GitHub repo that you point out
by Nicolas Rogier.
I'm not sure how to say his name.
Sorry, Nicolas.
This is an adaptation of Jake Vander Plaats' graphic
about the landscape here.
And so, how's this picture fit for you?
Do you think this is pretty accurate?
>>Yeah, I do, because I think it points out
a couple different things when you start
thinking about visualization.
So one of the key things that you
can glean from looking at this, and for the people that
are listening, it's a kind of starburst plot.
And you've got a whole bunch of linkages
between these different visualization libraries.
And something that jumps out is Matplotlib
is at the center of many of these libraries
and it's the foundational tool
that's used to build other libraries.
And so I think that's a key concept.
You can use Matplotlib on its own
or knowing Matplotlib makes it easier
to use some of these other libraries
that are built on top of it.
And the other thing is not shown on this,
but from a history perspective,
Matplotlib is sort of the grandfather
of all Python visualization libraries.
It's been around a long time.
And what you see on the,
for people that can see the visualization,
on the left-hand side,
JavaScript visualization is a little bit more modern,
like you said, and what people expect
when you think about an interactive visualization tool.
And so that's a different approach for visualization
that has some pluses and minuses.
So you've got that Matplotlib and JavaScript,
I think are the key distinctions for how libraries
are constructed for visualization in Python.
There are some other ones, there are some other libraries,
but the two that I really focus on
are either Matplotlib based or JavaScript based.
- Sure, in the Matplotlib side,
we have things like Matplotlib itself,
but also pandas and Seaborn and scikit-plot, ggplot,
stuff that people may be familiar from there.
And then on the JavaScript side, we've got Bokeh and Plotly,
some of the more, as you say, interactive ones,
and D3.js is in there as far as a foundational item as well.
- Exactly.
- Altair, I don't even see Altair in this list.
Maybe it's in there somewhere, but Altair.
Oh yeah, it's over there hanging out close to Matplotlib.
- Exactly, yes.
- More strongly related to JavaScript, got it.
- Yes.
- The third one, the three main branches here
are OpenGL.
What do you know about the OpenGL ones?
- Yeah, it's a good question.
I don't use them a whole lot.
I don't have a whole lot of experience with them.
I think there are certainly maybe a certain
like a very high volume data analysis
that might be where performance is really important,
where some of those OpenGL libraries,
I think were originally founded.
But I get the sense that most people are gravitating
towards either those Matplotlib or the JavaScript ones
that we've talked about.
I don't have as much experience nor see as much development
there with those libraries.
>>Yeah, maybe they're about visualizing changing data
that is flowing in real time, and you can actually
see a change because OpenGL is basically a graphics
library for animation, right?
>>Sure.
Yeah, I think that real-time component
is a good distinction.
Yeah, probably.
Now, before people run fleeing to the hills,
just because some of these projects
are grouped under JavaScript doesn't
mean you have to write JavaScript to use them, right?
Correct, absolutely.
Yeah, and all the ones that I cover and the ones on here
actually have a really nice API on top of it.
The JavaScript is abstracted away.
And in some ways, there's some benefits.
like I'll call it Altair because it leverages Vega Light.
And anytime that underlying JavaScript library is updated,
you kind of get all of those benefits
for free through Altair.
So it's, you know, in the spirit of open source,
building on the shoulders of others.
And there's a lot of benefits
to having that JavaScript foundation
and you don't need to understand JavaScript
to use any of them.
>> Yeah, and Altair really is like a transformation layer
into a Vega-Lite definition,
which is then processed by JavaScript to be rendered.
So there's even this sort of separation layer.
So it's not like you necessarily have to change your code
to pick up the changes there.
>> No, and I think at some point,
depending on how deep down the rabbit hole you go,
there could be points where, okay, it is really,
if you're doing something highly custom
or something really unique,
understanding what's going on under the hood
could be useful, but you can get pretty far
without having to know that.
- Right, maybe you're trying to make a book or an article
and you need something just so you're like,
you know what, I'm just gonna dump out
the Vega-Lite definition and just add two things to it,
but create it through Altair.
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
- Okay, fantastic.
All right, well, let's start with the granddaddy,
as you put it, Matt Plotlib.
So there's so many shiny new things,
but you make the case that knowing Matplotlib is still
really worthwhile and really important, right?
Because it is the foundation of so many things.
>>Exactly.
It is the foundation, and it's so important to know it.
And also, it is extremely highly customizable.
And I was thinking about this.
And in some ways, I think if Matplotlib,
if you stripped out a lot of the old and everything
that they've done in the last three to five years
and just focused on that new, and if you
could erase all the old tutorials and all
of the maybe ancient answers on Stack Overflow
and just focused on the new stuff,
people would have a much different perspective
on Matplotlib.
I think it's hard when you have something that's been around so long and has evolved,
that you do get some cases out there where, okay, an API or the way they approached a
visualization in the past was clunky, but in the five or 10 years since, it's improved.
And if you use the new and improved, it's really streamlined and really easy.
So I think it's important that people not get turned away right off the bat from Matplotlib.
There are certain types of visualizations where if you need a high degree of customization if you want to
Print it out or include in a manuscript or a book, you know, Matplotlib is really useful and powerful for it
In that distinction about the new and the old
Originally when Matplotlib came out, you know, correct me if I'm wrong
it's my limited understanding, is it was somewhat modeled
on the MATLAB way of programming,
and it had this imperative API.
The new one is more object-oriented, isn't it?
- Yes, yes, that's exactly right.
So there's this state-based interface
that was based on MATLAB,
and for people making that transition
from MATLAB to Matplotlib, it was seamless, right?
And they really understood it and it made sense,
But that way of doing things doesn't--
it's not really Pythonic.
And so the object-oriented interface is newer
and is clearly the direction that Matplotlib documentation
wants to steer you down that path.
And if you stay on that path, then it makes more sense,
I think, from a Python perspective.
And you do have a tremendous amount of power.
And I would say the other thing that I think turns people off
with Matplotlib in the past is the visualizations
are relatively unstyled.
I mean, they're kind of plain, whereas some
of these newer libraries just out of the box
make something that look really nice.
Matplotlib allows you to customize it,
but that's extra work.
One of the things that Matplotlib has done
is they have a new theming, or a relatively new theming API.
And so if you use that, then you do
get visualizations that look a little nicer out of the box
and are more visually appealing.
>>Yeah, it does have that kind of--
it looks fine, but it kind of just looks a little bland,
right?
And it doesn't have that D3 JS feel.
Although I got to give them some pretty mad props on the XKCD.
>>Exactly.
>>You've seen this, it sounds like.
Yes, I have.
So if people I'm sure most people out there listening know the XKCD comic,
right, if you don't go to your terminal or command prompt and run Python three
and then just type import anti gravity, then you'll know.
But they have this it's been around forever and it has this sort of style
of like handwritten but not handwritten.
But one of the things you can get.
Is you can get the XKCD theme.
Exactly, yes, yeah, it's really cool and you know every once in a while you'll find an article that someone put together where they
show this beautiful visualization and then you'd be surprised that's
Matplotlib and they show all the steps and you can configure and you can make something as nice as any of the
JavaScript frameworks that are out there, but it does take some time. There are more lines of code to get there
Yeah, that's true
on this XKCD thing, it might sound like it's,
well, ha ha, that's funny, like everybody loves XKCD.
I do think there is some value to presenting results,
whether that be a user interface
or a visualization of analysis,
where you wanna give it this preliminary look,
this unfinished look, right?
And so if you're gonna come into a meeting
and you wanna say, this is what the early data says,
this is what our first pass analysis says.
Put it in the XKCD, they might set that tone
versus if it's like perfect and beautiful,
like, well, you're done.
Like, no, no, we're not done.
We're not, we're really far from done.
This is just the beginning.
I just wanna give you a hint of what we're finding out.
I think there's a way that you could actually use this.
That would be practical.
- I agree.
I mean, it's a good point.
And one of the things that I think
when you go into a business setting,
everybody's used to standard Excel plots.
And when you bring in something else like this,
like an XCD plot or some other plot
that people aren't used to,
it does get them to focus
and look at it a little bit different
and can steer the discussion in a little bit different way.
- Yeah.
Yeah, so one of the little areas that I thought was
just really nice and really simple would be things like,
if you go and plot something with Matplotlib
and you have a lot of ticks along the bottom,
it's very common that the words start to overlap each other
and you're like, well, this isn't working.
And just little simple things like putting an angle
on the values in the x-axis can make it so much nicer.
>>Yes.
And one of the things that I--
I do have a soft spot in my heart for Matplotlib.
on the official documentation.
I think under the tutorials, they
took one of the blog posts that I wrote on matplotlib,
and it has been incorporated into the official tutorial
about how to get started.
So I think that's kind of cool.
I'm proud of that.
Absolutely.
Another one that I thought was nice to know about that's
not at all obvious is formatters,
using like f string formatter type things for when
the data gets put up there.
So maybe instead of having 201, 0, dot, da, da, da,
some huge long decimal, you could
format that as a number with no decimal point, no sense.
>>Yeah, I use that all the time for currency.
So if you're showing like millions,
you don't want to have all the zeros,
maybe just format as dollar sign 2m or whatever.
And Matplotlib makes that very easy to do.
And dates here, as you're showing,
are always one of those challenges.
With any time you're plotting something,
trying to figure out the right level of dates
that convey the information but don't crowd out
the visualization.
- Yeah, absolutely.
So there's a lot to learn there, but yeah.
I still think a lot of people will be doing Matplotlib,
but also a lot of people will be choosing the newer ones.
Now for each of these, you came up with some pros and cons.
So for the pros category in Matplotlib,
you have robust options that can do almost anything
and lots of documentation examples.
- Yeah, yeah, I mean, that is anything you wanna do,
you can do it in Matplotlib.
The challenge is gonna be,
and you can find documentation examples,
What does get challenging is because the API
has evolved and changed over time,
looking at the official docs are great,
but when you can't find it there
and you go searching on the web,
you will find a tutorial from seven years ago
and the way they're telling you to do it may work,
but it's not the most efficient way
or may not work well with the way
the rest of your code is structured.
So I think that's-- - Maybe it's not taking
advantage of the themes or maybe it's using
a stateful API instead.
- Exactly.
- There's a lot of reasons it could be off.
- And then I think the final challenge with matplotlib
is there is some degree of interactivity,
but it's not at the high level
that some of the other libraries have.
So if you have a scatter plot
and you wanna zoom in on an individual plot,
look at the data,
it's not as easy to do in matplotlib
as it is in some of the other libraries.
The other pro that I'd say with Matplotlib
is if you are trying to get your visualization
in another format--
so you're trying to put it in a document,
you're trying to put it in a PDF, SVG,
any kind of graphic format, Matplotlib supports that.
Out of the box, it's very easy to save it in any format
and move it into whatever other document you have.
Whereas some of the other ones are a little more challenging
to do that or maybe don't have as high quality output
as Matplotlib does.
>>Especially if it's an SVG, you can scale that almost infinitely.
>>Yes, exactly.
>>Yeah.
Another thing that is going to be a repeated theme
throughout many of these frameworks, but is also here,
is the ability not to just make one charge or one picture
or one plot of some variation,
but to build multiple plots, right?
So for example, a matplotlib, you can put,
there's a, on the examples here,
they have a MRI with EEG.
And so they've got the brain, a picture of the brain,
and then a MRI, and then also some other measurement,
which I don't know enough brain science to know
what it's for, but--
- Neither do I, it looks cool.
- It looks cool, right?
But you can create a single picture
that puts like two graphs and then a graph below it, right?
There's a way to compose these
beyond just making one picture.
- Exactly, and if you think, well, I could do this in Excel,
I could put two or three graphs next to each other,
but here's where the power of Matplotlib comes into play.
Let's say you were running experiments in a lab
and you're doing hundreds of these,
you wouldn't go into Excel
and individually position all this.
No, you write your Python script,
you develop that layout for those different visualizations,
And then you're done.
Once you get the data, you just kind of run through it
and you can iterate through it.
And that's really the power
of using a real programming language to do visualization
versus just trying to do one-off visualizations in Excel
or some of the other tools out there.
- Sure, and instead of necessarily putting those pictures
into a notebook output, you could write a loop.
It says, go get me this experiment's data
and generate this graph and save it to a file.
Get the next one.
find out even what's in the folder,
pull them all in, loop over them,
generate one picture, then the next,
and the next, and the next with the right name.
And so it could just be all automatic,
either in a script or just in a notebook
that doesn't have as much output.
- Right, exactly, yep.
The full power of Python is at your fingertips.
- Yeah, absolutely.
All right, so that's the kernel of one half of this branch.
The, maybe the next one,
This one's a little bit surprising to me
'cause I just don't do enough pandas,
but pandas, when I think about pandas,
it's about manipulating data and reading data
and transforming data and doing that tidy data preparation
that you spoke about, all those different things,
but there's also graphing built into pandas itself.
- Yes, and that graphing is built on top of Matplotlib.
So that's why from a course perspective
and thinking about visualization,
I think having that matplotlib foundation sets you up
so that when you're in Pandas, where, like you said,
you'll be doing the majority of your data input, manipulation,
and analysis, it's important to understand what visualization
tools you have there.
And a lot of the standard visualizations
that you want to do with a line chart, scatter plots, bar
charts, box plots, histograms, you can do with Pandas.
And it's mostly a very thin wrapper around Matplotlib.
So that's why it helps if you get this output
and you look at it and say, well, I just
want to customize it a little bit.
Typically, if you know that Matplotlib API,
then you could customize it in Pandas
or go into Matplotlib and customize the Pandas output.
So I think that is really useful.
The other thing that's interesting about Pandas
is it will allow you to plug in other backends.
So matplotlib is the default, but you
can enable backends for Plotly and a few
of the other visualizations.
So it can be kind of this universal interface
to visualization.
In my experience, I don't use the pandas visualization
a whole lot.
But I do think it's important for people
to understand that it's out there because there are times
where that's the quickest way to get something out there.
And it's sufficient for the quick and dirty needs.
- Well, yeah, sometimes you open up a Panda,
you read something like a CSV or whatever,
and you just wanna know, what is this?
And you would type df, a data frame, df.head or tail.
One of the, and it gives you just a little brief view
into it, but, you know, there's the picture's worth
a thousand words sort of thing.
And if all you have to say is just dot plot, and that's it,
or dot hist, and now you have a picture instead of that tail
or head equivalent, that's a really cool way
to just sort of quickly explore the data.
>>Exactly.
And there are some other more unique plots in pandas.
So there are some plots called the Andrews curves.
and parallel coordinates that are more advanced.
And to be honest, it's more of a data science
kind of machine learning plot.
It's not something you use that often,
but it is important to understand if you need it,
that it is out there in Pandas for you.
- Yeah, the Andrews curves reminds me a lot
of like a Lawrence generator, a tractor.
>> Something from Chaos Theory.
A bunch of lines like looping over and over and over and over.
>> Exactly. It looks pretty cool.
You'd probably blow some people's minds if you put that up,
but it's specialized.
But it does speak to when you start getting into this visualization world,
there are specialized libraries and you might find
something in your niche that you're working that this is really useful,
and it's really powerful and it's maybe hard to do
in other tools and boom, it's easy in pandas
or some of the other tools.
- Yeah, so let me tell,
I'd normally try to avoid saying code on here
'cause it's audio, but given a data frame,
I can say plot.figure and then just call Andrews curves,
give it the data frame and a name and boom,
you get this amazing visualization of your data
like on three incredibly simple lines.
- Yes.
- This is the kind of stuff that I was referring to
at the beginning when I said like,
you almost don't need to know Python.
I mean, technically there's a little bit of Python,
but barely, right?
- Right, right.
And it's just starting to understand how to think about
how you could use these tools and getting familiar with it
so that the first time you're trying to build something
is not, you're not also trying to learn in the API
and all these other visualization topics
on top of trying to solve whatever problem you're
trying to solve with visualization.
>> Well, yeah, there's definitely some neat stuff to do visually
with pandas, and people should certainly be using it.
Also, based on the matplotlib kernel, we have Seaborn.
Where's this fit into the world?
>> So Seaborn builds on top of matplotlib, like you said,
But it really focuses more on doing statistical analysis
of your data, and taking that data
and frequently transforming it in some ways
and developing a visualization.
So I use it a lot for histograms and box plots.
But where Seaborn is really, really powerful
is the ability to do facets, facet plotting,
or small multiples.
And that's where you take a plot and you change a variable
over each row or column.
And then you get a grid of several plots.
So you've got 9, 12, however many plots you need.
And it gives you an opportunity to spot data anomalies, trends
very easily.
and present a wealth of information
in a very compact frame.
And what I like about Seaborn is it is very easy to do this.
So the code that's required to do this
is typically one or two lines of code.
And you get this really nice plot
that has different colors.
It has data varying across the rows and columns.
You can change the shape, the size, everything
with those visualization concepts
that we cover in the beginning to develop visualization
that really give you a lot of insight very quickly.
>>Yeah, absolutely.
It's very statistical focused, isn't it?
>>It is.
It is.
It is very statistical focused, and some of the plots
are more complex.
And having a statistical background
will help you understand them.
But simple things like just doing
bar plots or histograms or a count plot or a heat map
are relatively straightforward to explain to others
and easy to create with Seaborn.
And then you're right.
There are some of the plots that are definitely much more
deep in the statistical toolbox.
And you have to know how you would explain them to others.
>>Luis: So this faceting thing is pretty interesting.
If you go to the Seaborn examples,
they've got one for, it looks like five different variables,
or sorry, four variables,
and they're looking at two different groups on one of them.
And you could just say, show me,
basically, instead of give me a picture of this data,
take any two pieces of information and generate a graph
to show me how those things correlate, right?
One of the pieces of data that you did a lot of work with
was the automobile gasoline efficiency data
from the EPA, right?
- Yes, yeah.
And what I find really fascinating about this
is when you get the data set up properly
and you wanna look at all these different relationships,
it's very easy to slice and dice
and mix up those relationships to see where the trends are.
So if we're looking at fuel efficiency,
we could look at it by the year the cars were manufactured.
We could look at it by are they front wheel drive,
all wheel drive cars, how many cylinders do they have,
are they electric--
- SUV versus car, all these things, yeah.
- Yeah, there could be a price component,
there could be just a whole bunch of different ways
to look at it.
And when you have a big data set,
Those are the types of things that are very difficult to do
just by looking at the numbers.
And that's where visualization really shines
and where Seaborn makes it tremendously easy to just
quickly iterate through and say, OK, I
want to look at these two variables together.
Now let's layer in a third variable.
Now there's a fourth variable.
Well, I don't like this.
Let's switch them around a different way.
And I use Seaborn a lot because of that flexibility
of just exploring the data, quickly figuring out
what those trends are, what those insights are,
and rapidly iterating through it for the exploratory analysis.
>> Another thing that Seaborn has is it looks really nice,
and it has this idea of themes.
>> Yes.
>> So easy to make it look good, right?
>> It is.
I mean, Seaborn out of the box applies some themes
and also does things behind the scenes with the visualization
to make it cleaner and to try and format the data
so that dates line up appropriately
and colors look nice and there's appropriate spacing
and things like that.
And there are some other things that
are pretty easy to control, to turn on and off or change
the color palettes with Seaborn.
But generally, out of the box, it strives to look good
and it looks nice.
And what's also beneficial about it
is it is just matplotlib under the hood.
And so if you get to the point where you've done your analysis
and things look pretty good, but you want to do some tweaks,
there are some convenience functions in Seaborn
to do that.
But there's also-- it's just matplotlib under the hood.
So if you know matplotlib and you want to tweak some things,
you can do that as well.
Yeah, for sure.
One thing I want to maybe take a step back on here
with Matt Plotlib on a lot of these examples,
not this one I got up here, but on lots of them,
I'll see--
and you talked about this-- that they'll
have semicolons some of the time.
And Python's famous for not requiring semicolons
at the end of lines.
What's the story there?
>>Yeah, the semicolons are just an artifact
of when you're developing in a Jupyter Notebook
And when you show that plot, the matplotlib
will show additional information about the plot.
So it will have a string descriptor,
and then it will show the plot.
And if you use the semicolon, it will
suppress that extra information.
So all you see is the plot.
So it's certainly-- it's not required by any means.
And you're right.
It does-- for people that have played with Python for a while,
you wonder why there's a semicolon there.
but it's just to suppress some of that extra information that
gets shown.
And it's not on all the lines.
It's just on certain plotting lines.
The other lines don't need it.
So it is a little unclear if you're not sure,
which is why I'm bringing it up.
All right, moving on from Seaborn,
we start to bridge our way over into the JavaScript D3.js side
of things with Altair.
And Altair, I think is certainly very well known
and very well respected.
It's one of the newer ones, isn't it?
- It is, yes.
I have to look, I don't remember off the top of my head,
but if Matplotlib was started in like 2012,
Altair is probably in the last five years or so.
- Yeah, yeah.
- I would imagine.
So definitely much newer, but has been,
tremendous amount of updates.
What was it?
2015.
OK.
And Jake, who started it and maintains it,
did an awesome job of leveraging a lot of the best practices
from Python libraries as well as R to build Altair.
And like we said, it's built on top of Vega.
So there's that-- any time that new work
is done in that JavaScript library,
it's easier to port it to Python
so that you can leverage that as well.
- Yeah, quite popular, almost 8,000 GitHub stars.
And Jake Vanderplass added or changed 353,000 lines,
that removed 240,000 lines.
And Allison BG as well, something on a similar scale.
That's a ton of work.
Yeah, yeah, no, it's it's it's a fabulous library.
I mean, there's what one of the things I really like about the library is the gallery.
Yeah, that's where we're going now.
And the documentation is really great for Altair.
And once you start to get into it, you need to spend a little bit of time.
Just make sure you understand how the library works.
But then probably 90 percent of the time you're going to go to the gallery and try and find something.
And you look at the code and you're like, oh, OK, that's how I do it.
- Yeah, like this is the one I want.
- Yes, exactly.
- There's a lot of interesting aspects
about creating graphs here.
So one of the common ones is to create a scatter plot,
which is called Mark Circle in this world, right?
And hopefully those are similar enough
to be put together as the same thing.
And those create little dots that show like,
where's all the data from these different categories say.
And one thing that's interesting,
is you can say, I'd like the color,
I want the X to be this value and the Y to be that value,
but then I want the color of the dot
to be based on another column,
and maybe the size to be on a third one.
So in this EPA car data, you could say,
well, I want the color of the dot to be the type of vehicle,
like an SUV or a car or whatever.
And then I want the size to be the number of cylinders
in the engine.
And that's just incredibly easy, but it really
draws out the data.
>>It does.
And Altair makes it easy to combine this in different ways.
So if you want to have a scatter plot and a bar chart
or a histogram, you can combine these together.
You can also do the faceting that we talked about with
Seaborn.
You can do with Altair where you change the variable
across the columns and rows to get different plots.
And the other thing that Altair--
one of the other things Altair introduces
is interactivity out of the box.
So because it is JavaScript-based,
you then have that ability to go in and, as you're doing here,
for the people who can see it, you can hover over a spot
and then control what information
is shown for that hover.
So you can see, oh, what's going on with this individual dot?
Well, it's a Volkswagen Rabbit from Europe,
and it has a 71 horsepower engine
and gets 31.9 miles per gallon.
And so it's really cool and really useful
for doing that exploratory analysis, where
you want to see the individual data points
and maybe drill into it a little bit more.
Yeah, the interactivity is great.
The ability to add custom tooltips
and then have those tooltips have like F-string style
formatting as well is pretty excellent.
So if the data doesn't show up just the way you would like,
you could have something.
You could say small, medium, large versus this number,
that number.
So you can kind of think about it separately and differently,
right?
>>Exactly.
And one of the other things that's interesting about Altair
is it does try to infer different aspects about your data.
So it tries to understand, well, is this data continuous data?
Is it date data?
And you can specify the different types of data.
So you can say that it's quantitative
or it's an ordinal value or nominal value.
And the actual visualization will change a little bit
depending on that data type.
And so that's a unique thing that Altair does.
And I think that's one of those things
as you start going down this visualization path,
you start to think about your data a little bit differently
and think about how you want to present it.
And Altair gives you that window
into all the flexibility you have with presenting data.
- One of the really nice aspects of interactivity
of these is the legend.
So the legend will show, you know, it really looks nice.
and it matches the color and the name,
and it's in a font that is pretty readable.
But if you set it up right,
you can go and actually click on these
and either just highlight one,
or you can have them sort of be toggle buttons.
So if you wanna just focus on,
let me pull out just, in this case,
it's got agricultural, finance,
government type of spending or something.
You can just say, "I wanna just see
the educational and health,"
and click that, and it highlights that
sort of separate from the rest of them.
- Yes, and it's really easy.
There's like one line of code
that you need to do to set that all up.
- Right, add selection or something simple like that, right?
- Exactly, yep.
- One other thing I wanna touch on with Altair here,
and I also wanna talk about an example,
but you talked about, was it data,
was it transformed or something?
You've gotta either use a file or a little server
or something to process the data?
What's the story with that?
>> Yeah, so one of the things that
can be a little tricky with Altair is behind the scenes,
it's translating whatever data you have into a JSON file.
And so what that means is when you have 10 or 20 data
elements, it's not that big a deal.
But when you have thousands of elements,
you can suddenly get to a point where
that file is really huge.
And so rightly so, Altair makes sure
that you don't inadvertently embed that in your notebook.
So you could end up with your Jupyter notebook suddenly
being 50 megs because you've got all these Altair
visualizations in there.
So there are some options for how
you can manage that data so that it's not necessarily stored
directly in the notebook file.
Maybe you have that data stored separately,
kind of like on a cache file in a directory,
or potentially more of like a real-time streaming option
where you have a backend service
that's running behind the scenes
that streams up the data to you.
So there is a little bit more complexity sometimes
with Altair to get it running.
And because of that visualization,
because of the JSON approach that it uses.
So that's certainly one of the watch outs and things
to keep in mind.
I would say the other thing that sometimes
has been a challenge for me with Altair
is saving visualizations.
So if you want to create something as an SVG
in Matplotlib or Seaborn, it's very straightforward.
You just save it with Altair.
Sometimes it can be a little challenging because of the way
it's trying to render those visualizations
and save them to a PNG or SVG file.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, so you've got to set that up and select the right one.
It'll work if you don't have too much data
without doing that, right?
But then--
>> Correct.
>> --there's some limit where it's like,
this is too much.
You've got to have to push it outside of the notebook.
>> Yes.
Yeah, and you'll get an error message,
and it'll tell you what's going on.
But I do mention it in the course, some of the options
for getting around it.
And the documentation is good
about what those options are as well.
- Sure.
All right, so to wrap up Altair,
I wanna talk through a little example here.
And I'll put this example in the show notes
so people can check it out.
Let's try to describe this picture here.
And like I said, I'll put it in the show notes
so people can see it.
You have this Amazon author reviews
for the top 20 most reviewed books,
most reviewed authors over the last 10 years
or something like that, right?
- Yes.
- Tell us what's going on in this picture
and we can maybe talk through just the API components
that make it happen.
- Sure, so behind the scenes, the data is,
I can't even, well, I guess this one's through,
what, 2016 or so, 10 years or so of Amazon reviews.
So on the X axis, it's 2009 through 2020.
And then on the Y axis, we have authors.
So a lot of famous authors in this timeframe
and some of these authors will have one book a year,
they'll have multiple books a year.
And so it will have a circle where for each author
for the year they published a book
and the size of the circle
represents how many reviews they had.
So this is a really quick way to see how consistent some of these top authors
are over years. you know, it's,
it's sort of interesting like Dale Carnegie is at the top. I mean,
he wrote this book, I don't know, probably 50 plus years ago,
but it's still a bestseller on Amazon.
And then you have other people, that are,
maybe a little more sporadic, but it's a,
It's a very easy way to see the consistency
and then the number of reviews
that each author gets for a year.
And I would say, you know,
if an author has more than one book,
obviously they'll have more reviews.
So it's not broken out by book, it's just purely by author.
- Right, and when you build up this picture,
some of the things that happen is
there's a legend that shows up.
The legend is basically just a copy,
slightly offset of what's on the left.
But what you really wanna know
is what's the size of the circle means.
so you can add like an alternative legend
and you can put a grid behind it
and make it really easy to follow the timeline.
There's just a really cool bunch of features.
And this is the kind of picture I was thinking about
when we were thinking, when I said, you know,
like if you just go and call plot or circle
or whatever, you know, mark circle,
you end up with something that's not all that impressive.
But if you layer a few of these ideas on, then it's great.
Right.
So like we said, we've got the author and the year,
and then the size.
We configure the size based on the number of reviews.
Then we configure the color based on the author
so that it's a little easier visually to look at this
and see the information.
And then we also do this thing that
is interesting with Altair is when
you think about Seaborn and Matplotlib and Pandas
and some of the other libraries we'll talk about,
You typically do the data manipulation in pandas.
Altair has its own ability to do manipulation and transformation
of data.
And so there is this option--
I could have filtered it down to the top 20 authors,
but I use this transform filter to select only the top authors.
And that's all in Altair, not using any pandas.
And then the final thing that we do
is configure the width and the height and the title.
So that's all one long piece of code that looks intimidating,
maybe if you haven't worked with Altair.
But when you take a step back and break it down and think
about what it is you're trying to do with your visualization,
And then with a basic understanding of the Altair API,
it's pretty straightforward and extremely powerful.
>>Sure.
You kind of got to do it in steps.
It's a very fluent API.
Alt.chart.markcircle.encode.config.
But if you take each one of those relatively simple
function calls, then try to understand that
and see what you're doing.
And then it turns out to be not too bad.
>>Yeah, exactly.
And what people need to realize when they're thinking
about this course is, anytime I develop code
and it looks like this and it has this many lines,
you're right, it wasn't, I didn't start off.
I did first, let's just do author versus year.
Well, I don't like this, I need to tweak one more thing.
Then I need to tweak one more thing
and you iterate over it to get there.
And once you kind of understand how all these libraries work
it's not too much work, but it does take a little bit of time
and that's why it's important to dive into the data
and play with it and experiment with it
and see what works for you.
>>Yeah, it almost is its own little mini language.
>>It is.
All right, before we move on to the next one,
question from the audience, I'm all out there asking,
can we do responsive and animated workflow diagrams
with Matplotlib, for example,
continuous builds development on different server
or deployment on different servers?
I'm not entirely sure exactly what you're asking,
but certainly you can automate these things.
It doesn't have to be in a notebook.
This could all be put into a script, right?
>>Yes, and there are--
matplotlib does support some animation.
And I can't remember how much of this
is out of the box matplotlib versus third party libraries,
but I've certainly seen visualizations
that people have done with matplotlib where it's something
changing over time or steps in a process,
you can do that with Matplotlib.
- So you could create one of those language battles.
Have you ever seen those where like over 20 or 30 years,
it's either the browser or the language
is one of the most popular, then it goes up and all that.
- Yeah, you could do that.
I'd have to look and see what would be the best approach,
but those sorts of options are out there.
- Fun.
All right.
Sticking in the JavaScript side of things,
the other really popular one over there is Plotly.
What's special and unique about Plotly?
- I think Plotly is special and unique
because it is a newer plotting library
kind of on the order of Altair.
It is supported by a company out of Canada,
but the Plotly visualization library
is completely open source.
It is based on JavaScript.
But what I like about it is everything
is interactive out of the box.
So any plot you make, as soon as it renders,
you can take your mouse and you can hover over it.
You can zoom in.
You can limit the range of data.
And so that is really powerful.
And then the second thing that I really like about it
is the history of Plotly, there was a separate Plotly
visualization, and then there was something
called Plotly Express, which was streamlined.
And the Plotly Express API, in my opinion,
is very similar to Seaborn.
And it is very--
I think it's Pythonic.
It's very easy to understand and pick up.
And over time, they've expanded it
to where now that's the default visualization.
So it's very easy to get started with Plotly.
It makes those interactive plots out of the gate.
And then it does have some unique plots.
So some of the custom tree map plots, scatter matrix,
you can do some plotting on maps to show geographic plots.
Those are all out of the box, work pretty well,
and are fairly simple to create.
>>Yeah, the tree map and the sunburst,
those come from Plotly, right?
>>Yes.
>>Or at least are in Plotly is one of the options.
>>And one of the other things that
is interesting about Plotly, like any of these visualization
tools, you have to be able to go in and configure and customize
and tweak things.
And Plotly gives you that ability to generate a plot,
but then you can update it over time.
So you can change colors.
You can change the way data is presented.
You can change pretty much anything
with the plot using a fairly simple API as well.
>>Yeah.
People should definitely go and check out the tree maps example.
One of the really cool interactions is, for example, the one that I'm looking at here, it has, here's the world, and then here's the different continents, so like Asia, Africa, the Americas, then if you want to, you know, within each one of those, they've got a little
blocks that says, well, here's how large of an impact,
like for example, Nigeria and Egypt are,
you know, have more people in it,
I guess, than the other countries.
And then they're colored by what their actual values are.
But if you wanna just focus on say Africa,
you can just click on that section of this thing
and it just zooms in to show you just that information.
And this, you're not gonna get this with Matplotlib.
No, no, no, you're not.
And it's--
>> This ability to just dive in and out of the data.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
And it is very simple.
I use Plotly quite a bit, especially
when I want to explore the data.
So you want to have a scatterplot or this tree map
or any of the other visualizations.
And you can easily filter or zoom in, zoom out.
And yeah, so you're showing some of the other cool kind of unique
visualizations that are out there to plot lead that maybe aren't as
available in some of the other libraries.
Yeah, yeah, the sunburst has a real similar the sunburst is like a pie
chart. But as you interact with it, it like zooms into those sections.
Yes, pretty, pretty amazing ways.
Yeah, well, that is pretty cool. I haven't actually seen that one.
It's just like, it just says, I want to explore this data.
Not only can I, but I'm going to.
>> Yes, exactly.
>> Yeah, cool.
Does Plotly have this idea of a back end server, like Altair?
>> Plotly, out of the box, no.
It's more, I guess, I have to think behind the scenes,
the actual architecture.
I don't know.
But I do know that you don't have to necessarily worry
about your data as much and suddenly having
a huge file that shows up in your notebook
that you have to deal with like you do with Altair.
>> Right.
Yeah, amazing.
OK, so this is good looking stuff.
And really top marks on the animation and interactivity
sort of diving into the data, right?
>> Yes.
Yep.
>> Cool.
All right, so that's the building block libraries
for the different options.
I know there's many other plotting libraries
and we saw in our original graph
that there's a bunch here that we didn't touch on,
but these are the ones that you felt
are most important right now, yeah?
- Yeah, yeah, and it's interesting.
I struggled a little bit with where to draw the line,
what else, some of the other things
I might wanna bring in.
After I posted about the course,
I did get some feedback, you know, how come we didn't talk about Bokeh and Panel and HoloVis?
And you know, I think the short and sweet answer was I had to draw the line somewhere.
I didn't have as much experience with those libraries.
So I didn't dive into them.
They are also libraries that are kind of undergoing some, they've undergone changes in the past
and they are working to clean up their documentation,
get the examples cleaned up.
So I think it's certainly worth considering those as well.
The other one that I would point out
that is really interesting to me, but I haven't used it,
but I think a lot of your listeners
might be interested in is a library called
Plot9 that is meant for people that have used
ggplot from an R perspective.
And it's essentially like a direct port of that to Python.
So if you really like ggplot and miss it from R,
then you can use plot 9 to replicate that in Python.
And it uses matplotlib behind the scenes.
And it looks fascinating to me, especially for people
that come from that R background.
>>Sure.
Yeah, well, that's something we haven't even touched on,
is like the influence of R and like the parallels there.
And then--
- Yes.
- Yeah.
We probably went too much.
So we've got two more things to cover
and these are, where do I maybe run my code?
If I wanna put it online and make it interactive
and let other people interact with it, right?
So two of them, Streamlit and Plotly-.
Tell us about these.
- Yes.
So, everything we've talked about now there,
especially with Plotly and Altair,
There is some degree of interactivity.
But when you want to build a dashboard
or want to build more of like an application
where you can select and filter data,
maybe have different visualizations,
maybe have complex visualizations like maps,
you need something more than just the out of the box
Altair or Plotly.
And Streamlit is a very simple way
to wrap a little bit of extra Python code
around your visualization
and you get this interactive application for free.
And so like the demo you're showing right now
is a great, you know, really powerful example
that shows Uber ride sharing in New York City.
It has sliders for you to choose
what time the pickup happens
And then it has these real-time visualizations
for different parts of the city about how
many pickups are happening.
And what's so cool about Streamlit
is there is very little additional Python code
you need to do that.
So the workflow that I will typically do
is I'll do my visualizations in Seaborn or Plotly or Altair.
And then once I realize I need that next level,
I can then just easily plop them into a separate file
with a couple lines of Streamlit code,
and boom, I've got an interactive application
that I can run.
- Yeah, it's a really interesting way of programming.
You basically write a top to bottom procedural script
that says, if I, in this case,
what are we putting, we're putting the hour of a pickup,
the hour of data you wanna slice and visualize.
And you said, well, if I could write a function
that would make a graph given the hour,
then you just say, and make the web app.
You know what I mean?
And it gives you the interactive sliders
for all the variables that go in.
And then you just, as the slider changes,
it just recalls your functions
and you don't have to know anything about web programming
or Ajax or front-end code and all of that just happens.
It's pretty fantastic.
Streamlit was recently acquired, I think,
Not so recently, but within a year or two.
- Yeah, they're required by Snowflake
for a really large amount of money.
I know a lot of people are kind of scratching their head
at that valuation, not to knock on streamline.
I mean, congrats to them, but it's a really interesting tool
and it will be interesting to see
what Snowflake does with them.
But this tool right now is open source.
And I do think it is a very powerful,
easy way to get a real, you know,
web native interactive app with very little code.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Let's see, Demetrius out there has a question says,
there are all these ways to make graphs quickly,
but I can't find anywhere on how,
any information on how to make an interactive calendar
with events quickly.
- Yeah, that's a good question.
I don't know.
Yeah I don't know of any any of these plots that have like a calendar function.
You know possibly streamlet.
It might maybe so.
So it's interesting you bring up streamlet because streamlet does have like third party apps or plugins that you can
incorporate so that the individual post that I definitely encourage them to take a look at streamlet and see if there's
something out there.
- Sure, so I interviewed, I believe it was Adrian,
double check, yeah, Adrian Truell,
back early days, early days of Streamlit.
We're talking two years ago.
- Four years ago. - I was inquired about that.
So people can check that out.
And I'm somewhat familiar with that.
With the other one though, that's very fascinating
that I don't know about is Dash.
How's that compared to Streamlit?
What's the, this comes from the Plotly company as well.
Yes. So Plotly, like we mentioned, is a company.
They have Dash, which is a much more sophisticated
and in-depth platform for developing
interactive applications or dashboards.
So whereas Streamlit is a little bit of code,
Dash is much more of you kind of are embracing
HTML and CSS and you're doing callbacks and you have just a ton of flexibility in how you
Structure your application and like this this demo you're having here
you've got wind speed histograms and you've got a line chart that's fully interactive and
Interactivity between the charts as you choose one it influences another
you can
- gives you
to kind of manage the back end as well.
So you can run it, I think it's a Flask server,
like on your system, you could do that.
But if you wanted to do an enterprise grade deployment,
you could do that as well.
It's really, if you could think of it,
Dash will probably let you do it.
And if you're a big enough company
and it's mission critical,
Dash does have that enterprise support
where you can pay a company to host it
and support it for you.
- You built a few, people should go look at the gallery
for the Plotly Dash.
There's a bunch of interesting things.
And one of the areas that stands out,
I mean, you've got many, many different types
of visualizations and whatnot,
but one of the things that stands out for me
is the streaming, the streaming data aspect,
you know, create a dashboard where you hook it up
to stock market data or IoT data, and it just goes, right?
- Right, exactly.
Yeah, it's designed to support a lot of data
and low latency and all those kinds of things.
So it's really powerful,
but this is one of those areas we talked about.
Everything up until now,
you don't really have to know a whole lot of Python.
Once you start getting into building Dash,
it gets a little more complicated.
And I think that's where you wanna make sure
you've got a good solid Python foundation
before you go and build a Dash dashboard to run your company.
- Yeah, but it's very powerful.
- Very powerful.
- Yeah, the interactivity between the different elements
is also quite interesting.
- It is, yes.
And that's one of the, I mean, you can do that
to some degree with Streamlit,
but Dash just makes, yeah,
you can have a ton of interactivity
between the different widgets
and the different visualizations.
- Cool, well, it looks great.
If I had a dashboard that looked like this,
I'd be proud of it.
It's not one of those things that's just like,
oh, I guess it works, you know?
No, it looks great.
- Yeah, I would be too.
- Yeah, cool.
All right, Chris, we've spent a lot of time on this.
I think we should probably button it up, but--
- Yeah, bring it home.
- A lot of great stuff.
Yeah, a lot of great stuff in the visualization space.
I think that's one of the really
very powerful aspects of Python is
it's just all of these tools.
It's not the language, it's not the standard library,
which all those, they are important.
Like it's, people need to think
this is sort of what people are talking about
when they say Python's awesome, it's great to use.
It's not how it does a for loop.
It's that I can say, you know, dot Andrews curve.
- Yes, yeah.
And it all builds, right?
So if you're, you know, just starting on Python,
then you start to build a little pandas knowledge,
you don't have to throw that away
and then focus on visualization.
It all builds on top of it and you can leverage
all that knowledge and then all the other
wonderful libraries that are out there.
Absolutely. - Yep.
All right, before you get out of here though,
final two questions.
If you're gonna write some Python code,
what editor or editors to use?
- I'm pretty much a 100% VS Code now.
- Right on.
Okay.
Even over notebooks?
- Yes, yes.
Yeah, I've gotten to where I use
the native VS Code notebooks.
- Like the comment divider type of style?
- It's just, they have continued to update it so much
that it just seems like it's a superior approach
for what I do and how I manage my environments right now.
- Nice.
And then notable PyPI package or as?
- Yeah, I put two in here.
I don't have a ton of experience with them,
but I wanted to call them out
because I do wanna spend some time with it.
So the first one is Splink.
And I wrote an article a couple of years back
about doing data linkage or data duplication.
And so for those of you that aren't familiar,
it could be a situation where let's say
you have your customer database
and it's got Chris Moffitt lives at 123 Main Street
and you have a third party data set
and it says Mr. Moffitt lives at 125 Main Street
and street is spelled as street.
How do you merge all that data together?
How do you do fuzzy matching?
And I played around with different options.
And this Splink is one that's actually
came out of the UK from an individual
that works at the Ministry of Justice,
which I think is just a cool name.
And he talks about using this to merge
millions of records together.
And I think it's a kind of really interesting tool
that is something that you can't really do in Excel.
And it's a challenging problem.
And anytime someone's spent some time on that kind of problem,
I think it's really interesting.
And I want to spend some more time looking at that.
Yeah.
And they have on their GitHub repo,
they got a couple of videos introducing it,
which is great.
Yes.
And the other one?
Red Frames.
So this is another one that I've seen come across my Twitter
feed a couple of times.
I have not used it directly, but it's
another library for manipulating data that's interoperable with pandas, but gives a little
bit more of that fluent API where you can kind of string all these commands together
to modify your data in ways that pandas supports a lot of this, but there are certainly some
things in pandas that are a little bit clunky.
And this looks like it's an attempt to try and bring some of that R goodness to Python.
>> Yeah.
It also looks a little bit like bringing SQL to it.
>> Yes.
Yeah.
>> Select a filter, a group, a sort.
You know, change the names a little bit and filter the way or sort, order by.
You know, it looks a little bit like SQL.
>> It just looks really interesting.
And like I said, I wanted to get some visibility to it.
I haven't used it extensively,
but certainly wanna play around with it a little bit more
and thought your listeners might be interested.
- Yeah, it looks very cool.
Thanks for sharing that.
All right, people are interested
in Python data visualization.
They wanna know more.
What do you tell them?
- Hey, check out the course.
So really excited about the course.
You know, if you've liked what you've listened to here,
the course on Talk Python Training has the examples,
the notebooks for you to go through and learn and play with this on your own.
And by the end of it, you should be at the point where you can start to apply it
to your own data. So I encourage you to check it out.
And if you do check it out, let me know. It'd be interesting to see what you think.
Yeah, it definitely covers all of this in hands-on detail,
not just conceptually. So yeah.
Thanks for being here, Chris. Thanks for sharing your experience. And yeah,
happy to have you back on the show.
Thank you. Great discussion.
Yeah, you bet. Bye bye.
Bye.
[BLANK_AUDIO]